Hiroshima
By John Hersey

August 23, 1946

At exactly fifteen minutes past eight in the morning, on August 6, 1945, Japanese time, at the moment when 
the atomic bomb flashed above Hiroshima, Miss Toshiko Sasaki, a clerk in the personnel department of the 
East Asia Tin Works, had just sat down at her place in the plant office and was turning her head to speak 
to the girl at the next desk. At that same moment, Dr. Masakazu Fujii was settling down cross-legged to 
read the Osaka Asahi on the porch of his private hospital, overhanging one of the seven deltaic rivers 
which divide Hiroshima; Mrs. Hatsuyo Nakamura, a tailor’s widow, stood by the window of her kitchen,
watching a neighbor tearing down his house because it lay in the path of an air-raid-defense fire
lane; Father Wilhelm Kleinsorge, a German priest of the Society of Jesus, reclined in his underwear 
on a cot on the top floor of his order’s three-story mission house, reading a Jesuit magazine, 
Stimmen der Zeit; Dr. Terufumi Sasaki, a young member of the surgical staff of the city’s large,
modern Red Cross Hospital, walked along one of the hospital corridors with a blood specimen
for a Wassermann test in his hand; and the Reverend Mr. Kiyoshi Tanimoto, pastor of the Hiroshima 
Methodist Church, paused at the door of a rich man’s house in Koi, the city’s western suburb, and 
prepared to unload a handcart full of things he had evacuated from town in fear of the massive B-29 
raid which everyone expected Hiroshima to suffer. A hundred thousand people were killed by the atomic 
bomb, and these six were among the survivors. They still wonder why they lived when so many others died.
Each of them counts many small items of chance or volition—a step taken in time, a decision to go 
indoors, catching one streetcar instead of the next—that spared him. And now each knows that in the
 act of survival he lived a dozen lives and saw more death than he ever thought he would see. At the
 time, none of them knew anything.

The Reverend Mr. Tanimoto got up at five o’clock that morning. He was alone in the parsonage, because for some 
time his wife had been commuting with their year-old baby to spend nights with a friend in Ushida, a suburb to 
the north. Of all the important cities of Japan, only two, Kyoto and Hiroshima, had not been visited in strength 
by B-san, or Mr. B, as the Japanese, with a mixture of respect and unhappy familiarity, called the B-29; and Mr. 
Tanimoto, like all his neighbors and friends, was almost sick with anxiety. He had heard uncomfortably detailed 
accounts of mass raids on Kure, Iwakuni, Tokuyama, and other nearby towns; he was sure Hiroshima’s turn would come 
soon. He had slept badly the night before, because there had been several air-raid warnings. Hiroshima had been 
getting such warnings almost every night for weeks, for at that time the B-29s were using Lake Biwa, northeast of 
Hiroshima, as a rendezvous point, and no matter what city the Americans planned to hit, the Super-fortresses streamed 
in over the coast near Hiroshima. The frequency of the warnings and the continued abstinence of Mr. B with respect 
to Hiroshima had made its citizens jittery; a rumor was going around that the Americans were saving something special 
for the city.