THE VIETNAM SYNDROME

BY CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS

MARCH 26, 2007

The very title of our joint subject is, I must tell you, a sick joke to begin with.
Perhaps you remember the jaunty names of the callous brutes in Reservoir
Dogs: Mr. Pink, Mr. Blue, and so on Well, the tradition of giving pretty names to
ugly things is as old as warfare. In Vietnam, between 1961 and 1971, the high command of 
the United States decided that, since a guerrilla struggle was apparently being protected 
by tree cover, a useful first step might be to defoliate those same trees. Famous 
corporations such as Dow and Monsanto were given the task of attacking and 
withering the natural order of a country. The resulting chemical weaponry 
was euphemistically graded by color: Agent Pink, Agent Green (yes, it is true), Agent
Purple, Agent Blue, Agent White, and—spoken often in whispers—Agent Orange. 
This shady gang, or gang of shades, all deferred to its ruthless chief, who proudly
bore the color of hectic madness. The key constituent of Agent Orange is dioxin: a horrifying
chemical that makes total war not just on vegetation but also on the roots and essences of life itself. 
The orange, in other words, was clockwork from the start. If you wonder what the dioxin effect can 
look like, recall the ravaged features of Viktor Yushchenko—ironically, the leader of the Orange Revolution.

The full inventory of this historic atrocity is still being compiled: it is no exaggeration to say that about 12 
million gallons of lethal toxin, in Orange form alone, were sprayed on Vietnam, on the Vietnamese, and on the 
American forces who were fighting in the same jungles. A prime use of the chemical was in the delta of the Mekong 
River, where the Swift Boats were vulnerable to attack from the luxuriant undergrowth at the water’s edge. Very well, 
said Admiral Elmo Zumwalt Jr., we shall kill off this ambush-enabling greenery by poisoning it from the skies. Zumwalt 
believes his own son Elmo who was also serving in the delta, died from the effects of Agent Orange, leaving 
behind him a son with grave learning disabilities. The resulting three-generation memoir of the Zumwalt family—My 
Father, My Son (1986), written by the first and second Elmos about themselves and about the grandchild—is one of 
the most stoic and affecting family portraits in American history.