The ruthlessly effective rebranding of Europe’s new far right

n April 2002, Jean-Marie Le Pen stunned all of Europe by defeating the socialist candidate, Lionel Jospin, in the 
first round of the French presidential election, and advancing to the final round between the top two candidates. 
Terrified by the prospect of a far-right victory, the French left – including communists, Greens and the Socialist 
party – threw their support behind the incumbent president, Jacques Chirac, a pillar of the centre-right establishment 
who had served as mayor of Paris for 18 years before becoming president in 1995. This electoral strategy effectively 
isolated Le Pens Front National (FN), depicting it as a cancerous force in the French body politic.

Two weeks later, on 5 May, Chirac won the election with an astronomical 0.82 of the vote, trouncing Le Pen by the 
biggest margin in a French presidential election since 1848. Raucous celebrations spilled into the streets of Paris. 
“We have gone through a time of serious anxiety for the country – but tonight France has reaffirmed its attachment 
to the values of the republic, Chirac declared in his victory speech. Then, speaking to the joyous crowds in the 
Place de la République, he lauded them for rejecting “intolerance and demagoguery.

But May 2002 was not, in fact, a moment of triumph. Rather it was the dying gasp of an old order, in which the fate 
of European nations was controlled by large establishment parties.

An electoral board showing France's far-right National Front president Marine Le Pen and reading: 100 National 
Front. 0 migrants is pictured during a demonstration  in Forges-les-Bains, south of Paris, France, Saturday, Oct. 8, 2016. 
French villagers are protesting the arrival of migrants who are being spread out around the country as the government 
shuts down the slum-like camp in Calais that has become a flashpoint in Europe migrant crisis. (AP Photo/Christophe Ena)
From the archive: The ruthlessly effective rebranding of Europe new far right – podcast
Read more
Jean-Marie Le Pen was an easy target for the left, and for establishment figures such as Chirac. He was a political 
provocateur who appealed as much to antisemites and homophobes as to voters upset about immigration, drawing his 
support largely from the most reactionary elements of the old Catholic right. In other words, he was a familiar 
villain – and his ideology represented an archaic France, a defeated past. Moreover, he did not seriously aim for 
power, and never really came close to acquiring it; his role was to be a rabble-rouser and to inject his ideas into 
the national debate.

Europe new far right is different. From Denmark to the Netherlands to Germany, a new wave of rightwing parties has 
emerged over the past decade-and-a-half, and they are casting a much wider net than Jean-Marie Le Pen ever attempted 
to. And by deftly appealing to fear, nostalgia and resentment of elites, they are rapidly broadening their base.