Living Like A Liberal

by Matt Labash, National Correspondent
 July 19, 2010 12:00 AM

This is a story about living the good life. Or not the good life, exactly, in the Italian, dolce vita understanding of 
the term. It is more about living the better life, a comparative way of living. It is about living better than I was 
before, living better than I once thought possible, living better, if you’ll forgive my candor, than do you. 

Here, I use you to loosely mean conservative or even disengaged liberal. For living better than you is all 
about honesty. Honesty with you. Honesty with myself. So I’ll just level with the two of us: I used to be a conservative. 
I mean, I wasn not some nutcake conservative. I didnt follow along with Glenn Beck at home, flowcharting the lineage of 
Lenin to Van Jones on my kids Fisher-Price chalkboard. I didnt attend Rand Paul rallies in a tricorn and a frilly 
blouse like some kind of colonial crossdresser. I was just a vanilla, middle-of-the-road conservative. As long as I 
remained undertaxed, overdefended, and unaborted, I was pretty content. Live and let live, I thought. I might have even
made a good Libertarian, except I hate science fiction, think Ayn Rand was a crank with an unfortunate haircut, and would 
fail the house drug test (when my results came back negative).

But my lesser living was a lifetime ago. Actually, just a few weeks ago, but it feels like the distant past. It was 
before my road to Damascus encounter, before the illuminative flame touched my torch of enlightenment. It was 
B.J.K.—Before Justin Krebs. 

Who is Justin Krebs, you ask Only my sensei. My guru. The man who made plain that I had politics all wrong. I used to 
think along the lines of the British writer and publisher Ernest Benn that politics was the art of looking for trouble, 
finding it whether it exists or not, diagnosing it incorrectly, and applying the wrong remedy. Thus, I had put my 
politics in my political box, and my life in my living box. When I should have placed all the contents in the same 
box—a much bigger, biodegradable one. (You can get them at Treecycle.com.) 

Krebs showed me that my politics shouldn not be just my politics, but also my religion, my sun and moon, my inhalation 
and exhalation. Since politics, particularly liberal politics, bring people so much joy, wouldn not I be better off 
politicizing everything—the way I live and work and play? That is a rhetorical question, by the way. The answer is 
a resounding yes, as evidenced right there in the title of Krebss new book: 538 Ways to Live Work and Play Like 
a Liberal.

The 32-year-old Krebs didn not just write this book, which comes complete with a 538-item checklist. He has lived it. 
He sharpened his liberal-living iron on the mean conservative streets of Highland Park, New Jersey; Cambridge, 
Massachusetts; and, finally, that repository of red state madness, the island of Manhattan. Girding him for battle 
were his parents—two good liberals, who sent him to a cooperative preschool, where he called all the other kids 
moms and dads by their first names. Krebs says his parents were his playmates as well, though all was not idyllic. 
There are some intimations of child abuse; they took him to a Walter Mondale rally when he was just 6 years old. 