Erasing the Cause of War

HUMANITY HAS PROBABLY evolved for more or less a million years and has always been crying out for peace on earth – Pacem in Terris, the old Latin phrase. But apparently, there is no peace in the world; yet without peace, we cannot possibly flower.
To see the extraordinary depth and beauty of life, the immensity of all living things, one must have peace, and that peace is denied wherever there is poverty. Even in affluent countries, there is a great deal of poverty. No nationalistic government can ever solve poverty because it is a global problem, one for the whole world, not a particular government, whether totalitarian, communist, or so-called democratic. The effects of poverty are degradation, the utter slavery of it, the brutality. And there is also the poverty of the mind, which is not resolved by books, institutions, organisations, or forums – that poverty ends when one understands the whole existence of oneself and one’s relationship to the world at large.
Religions have not encouraged or brought about peace in the world. They talk a great deal – the Christians talk about peace in the world – but religions have divided humanity. Just in this small town, there are I don’t know how many religious groups, dozens of them, institutions and foundations, each trying to tell people what to do. Religions have prevented peace and have brought wars: The Hundred Years War in Europe; torture and all the brutality of a culture based on religious concepts, dogmas and beliefs. And religions throughout the world have prevented right relationship between human beings. There have been five thousand years of war and we are still going on with it, killing each other – at the beginning with clubs and now we are able to vaporise millions. We have not evolved psychologically, inwardly, and as long as we are primitive psychologically, our society will be equally primitive.
So, can there be peace on this earth? This is a very, very serious question. Also, is it possible to live peacefully in oneself, without conflict, or are we forever condemned to live in conflict, to be at war? Is there a way out of all this? Certainly not through religions as they are, nor through political organisation, whether democratic, totalitarian or communist; nor through the division of nationalities. Governments are created by what we are. They have been structured, put together by our own demands. As long as you remain an American, and others remain Hindu, Buddhist or Muslim, we will have no peace on earth. Nor while there is racial division or cultural division. So, it is a very important question to ask of ourselves, not of another

