Ghost Soldiers

By Hampton SidesPUBLISHED: JAN 29, 2007

In early January 1945, General Douglas MacArthur unleashed hell on the Philippines. The storming of the 
island of Luzon by U. S. forces was one of the largest land invasions of World War II. As MacArthur's 
troops advanced south toward Manila, Army officials learned that approximately five hundred American 
prisoners of war were still being held at a Japanese work camp in Cabanatuan in the central Luzon plain. 
The prisoners were among the last of the twenty thousand American soldiers who had surrendered to the 
Japanese in April and May of 1942, and many were survivors of the Bataan Death March, which had claimed 
the lives of more than a thousand Americans. Cabanatuan became the largest American POW camp in the Pacific. 
Most of the thousands of prisoners who passed through were sent to other Japanese work projects in the 
Philippines and Japan. But these remaining inmates, "the ghosts of Bataan," were the sick and the dying, 
the leftovers, the ones too weak to work. Robert Lapham, a local American guerrilla leader, issued a 
warning to Army officials: As the Japanese forces retreated, they would certainly massacre these POWs 
rather than transport them. It had just happened in a smaller camp in the Philippines near Puerto Princesa, 
where 141 prisoners were burned alive and shot as Imperial forces fled.

On January 26, Lieutenant General Walter Krueger, head of the U. S. Sixth Army, ordered an eleventh-hour 
mission to rescue the Cabanatuan prisoners. Krueger assigned the mission to Lieutenant Colonel Henry Mucci, 
commander of a new, highly trained but little-used elite unit of Army Rangers, the Sixth Ranger Battalion. 
Mucci and Captain Robert Prince, commander of the Ranger C Company, were instructed to lead their men behind 
enemy lines ahead of MacArthur's advance, rescue five hundred prisoners, carry them back, and turn them over 
to the Sixth Army. No one but Krueger and the Rangers themselves knew anything of the mission. Its success or
 failure banked on 100 percent surprise.