HOW EXTREME HEAT COULD LEAVE SWATHS OF THE PLANET UNINHABITABLE
Late last July, a swath of the Middle East from Saudi Arabia across Kuwait to Iraq and Iran was hit by a heat wave.
 As usual, it was caused by a powerful high-pressure dome that parked overhead, compressing and heating the upper 
atmosphere, limiting convection, and trapping the lower atmosphere below it even as the desert floor heated the air
 from the ground up.  Heat waves  are relative affairs—technically, they are merely multi-day deviations from whatever 
the local norms happen to be. They don’t count for much in places like Denmark. The Middle East is not as milquetoasty 
as that. In Kuwait, for instance, the daily average maximum temperature in July is around 112 degrees, a level that would trigger urgent warnings in the United States but that in Kuwait is simply the expected weather.
The heat wave last July was different. The month started hellishly enough. At an automated weather station in a desert wasteland called Mitribah, in the country’s uninhabited North, the maximum temperature hovered around 114 degrees. Then the numbers started to climb, passing through 120 degrees on the 14th, topping 124 degrees on the 19th, and peaking at 129.2 degrees in the midafternoon of July 21, 2016. That temperature exactly matched the highest reliably measured air temperature in history—129.2 degrees, recorded on July 1, 2013, in Death Valley, U.S.A. The Mitribah report made news around the world because of concerns about global warming, though no single temperature demonstrates much, and it is actually the accelerating rise of pre-dawn minimums, rather than the slower rise of midafternoon maximums, that is affecting global temperature averages more rapidly than scientists had anticipated just a few years ago.
To get this out of the way: among weather experts there is universal acceptance that global warming is a fact and that it is caused by human enterprise. As a result, dangerous heat waves are hitting with ever greater severity. In June, the National Weather Service warned of record-shattering heat in the American Southwest that it went so far as to label  crazy.  This is a trend that will continue worldwide, with lethal consequences, especially for the young, the old, outdoor workers, and the poor. Forget about hurricanes and blizzards, cyclones and floods: heat waves already cause by far the largest number of weather-related deaths—many thousands every year—and they are to be feared. Virtually no weather expert thinks otherwise. Nonetheless, when it comes to the 129.2 degrees recorded at Mitribah, the immediate regret within a subculture of observers is that the temperature did not rise higher. One of them, the renowned weather historian Christopher Burt, told me,  It came very close to breaking the record—just a tenth of a degree. That drives some people nuts!  Burt is 62. He writes for the Web site Weather Underground and is the author of a best-selling guide and record book titled Extreme Weather. He lives in the hills of Oakland, California, in a climate so benign that it becomes annoying. About the search for extremes, he said,  There is so much minutiae. I start to burn out on it sometimes. To give you some idea: the National Weather Service uses Fahrenheit and rounds off to the nearest degree. For the 129.2 in Death Valley, we have a photograph of the thermometer that clearly shows it, but officially the high was rounded down to 129 degrees. The Kuwaitis measure temperatures on the Celsius scale to the nearest tenth of a degree. That means that Mitribah, which was officially 54.0 Celsius, converted to 129.2 degrees Fahrenheit. So officially it beat Death Valley, even though we know that Death Valley matched.  He shook his head. He said,  Now what are you going to do? And actually this was the fifth time Death Valley went to an official 129 degrees. The four previous times no one took a picture of the thermometers—they could have been at 129.4. We don’t know. 

