A World Without Clouds
On a 1987 voyage to the Antarctic the paleoceanographer James Kennett and his crew dropped anchor in the Weddell Sea, 
drilled into the seabed, and extracted a vertical cylinder of sediment. In an inch-thick layer of plankton fossils and 
other detritus buried more than 500 feet deep, they found a disturbing clue about the planet’s past that could spell disaster for the future.
Lower in the sediment core, fossils abounded from 60 plankton species. But in that thin cross-section from about 56 million
 years ago, the number of species dropped to 17. And the planktons’ oxygen and carbon isotope compositions had dramatically 
changed. Kennett and his student Lowell Stott deduced from the anomalous isotopes that carbon dioxide had flooded the air, 
causing the ocean to rapidly acidify and heat up, in a process similar to what we are seeing today.
While those 17 kinds of plankton were sinking through the warming waters and settling on the Antarctic seabed, a tapir-like
 creature died in what is now Wyoming, depositing a tooth in a bright-red layer of sedimentary rock coursing through the badlands
 of the Bighorn Basin. In 1992, the finder of the tooth fossil, Phil Gingerich, and collaborators Jim Zachos and Paul Koch 
reported the same isotope anomalies in its enamel that Kennett and Stott had presented in their ocean findings a year earlier. 
The prehistoric mammal had also been breathing CO2-flooded air.
More data points surfaced in China, then Europe, then all over. A picture emerged of a brief, cataclysmic hot spell 56 million years
 ago, now known as the Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM). After heat-trapping carbon leaked into the sky from an unknown source,
 the planet, which was already several degrees Celsius hotter than it is today, gained an additional 6 degrees. The ocean turned 
jacuzzi-hot near the equator and experienced mass extinctions worldwide. On land, primitive monkeys, horses and other early mammals
 marched northward, following vegetation to higher latitudes. The mammals also miniaturized over generations, as leaves became less 
nutritious in the carbonaceous air. Violent storms ravaged the planet; the geologic record indicates flash floods and protracted
 droughts. As Kennett put it, “Earth was triggered, and all hell broke loose.

