GLORY

Meet the NFL Cheerleader. Every Sunday afternoon, she graces football-field sidelines, stadium JumboTrons, and your living room television with her inaudible cheers, her hard body, and her unshakable positivity. At seventy-five bucks a week—that’s what she gets paid for all her work—why does she bother? What’s in it for her? That’s easy…
Right now Adrienne might be sick. It isn’t funny. It isn’t her stomach so much as her nerves, her heart, her history. Rhoneé, one of her closest cheerleader friends, has her eyes bugged out, standing outside the stall door, _ Adrienne? Adrienne, are you okay? 
 I’m good,  Adrienne is saying.  No, I’m good. I’m good. 
She vomits. This is not good. Something is seriously wrong with Adrienne. At pregame practice in the gym an hour ago, she ran off crying—twice. Ran to the bathroom and slammed her fist into the stall door to get ahold of herself, to reclaim herself, to remember who she is: a Ben-Gal. Both times she returned to the gym with a smile, got in formation, front row, left center.  C-I-N!  she roared,  C-I-N! N-A-T-I! LET’S GO! 
She seemed fine. She seemed Adrienne again, five feet nine, a thoroughbred of a woman, broad shoulders, booming voice, the biceps and forearms of a sailor. She is not the drama queen of the squad, not even close, not one of the girlie-girls, with the super-yummy cleavages and the wee, wee waists and the sugary smiles. She is the iron-willed, no-nonsense, no-curls straight shooter of the squad—six-pack abs, forlorn eyes, too busy with her own too busy life to deal with a lot of crap.
 Is Adrienne okay?  shouts Shannon from the other end of the locker room. Shannon is perhaps best known for her extreme volume of sandy blond hair.
 Is something wrong?  asks another, as news of Adrienne’s nausea filters through the din of cheerleader chatter.
Cheerleaders are all over the place, half-naked, shrieking, sitting, squatting, kneeling in front of mirrors in the panic of an NFL Thursday night. National television! The game starts in just over an hour. This is crunch time, hair-spray time, false-eyelash time, Revlon-Orange-Flip-lipstick time.  WOULD SOMEBODY PLEASE HELP ME? I CANNOT FIND MY MULTIPLICITY ESCALATE VOLUME WHIP!  Some cheerleaders are in curlers the size of Budweiser cans. The locker room, reserved just for them, is hardly equipped for the machinery of glamour, and so most have brought their own full-length mirrors, power strips, extension cords, suitcases of makeup, curling irons, hose._  Try my Bouncy Spray Curl Activator. You can totally glop it on. _ The cheerleaders are all scream and shout, jazzed with beauty adrenaline, in thongs and hose and push-up bras, stretching, bopping, bouncing, assisting one another with hair extensions, pasting over tattoos, spraying tans, announcing newly discovered cleavage-engineering solutions— Duct tape, girls! —hooting and hollering in a primpfest worthy of Miss Universe.
 We look so awesome. 
 Oh, my God, we do! 

